---
title: 'A Plague of Words: Sensationalism in the Time of COVID-19'
date: 2020-06-08
permalink: /posts/2018/10/word-plague/
tags:
  - opinion
excerpt: ""
---

A free and fair press does not come without its disadvantages. Nearly every avenue of free speech — from television news to social media — has dedicated time or provided an avenue to discuss COVID-19. Even if we’ve managed to avoid contracting the virus, there is no way we have managed to avoid hearing about it. The fatigue that comes from listening to repeated stories about the pandemic comes with a cost. At best, we know what the disease can do, how potent it is, why we must follow guidelines by the CDC, and why this virus transcends the medical system and into our social faculties. At worst, we become desensitized and lose patience with the organizations and governmental structures designed to keep us safe. 

In the years to come the American press must take its fair share of blame when a post-mortem of this pandemic is conducted. Between publishing premature articles about potential vaccines, covering sub-par research in the academic press, and relying on sensational media to fill airtime and populate newsfeeds, hysteria about COVID-19 has increased. The aftermath of these systemic failures will leave a profound impact on the American public, not just in terms of the trust they have with the press, but also in the relationship the average citizen will share with the first amendment. 

COVID-19 has become the time for opportunists. Many pharmaceutical companies have dramatically surged in stock market value as whisperings of potential vaccines leaked into the public domain. On the whole, these stories have been premature. Drugs like hydroxychloroquine, received an immense amount of coverage, only for information to be retracted afterward. Others like Remdesvir have been covered by the news and shown scientific promise — only to be overshadowed by more sensational stories of injecting bleach. While it remains a royal shame that American leadership has fallen apart at the seams, the press is responsible for giving a platform to these stories. The American public needs to hear about bizarre and sensational events only a handful of times. Instead, dozens of articles reiterating the dangerous and irresponsible statements of an irreverent ideology populate the news channels. 

Such sensationalism comes with a price. Hearing so much about the newest trials has led people into a frenzy. Several Americans have died, and dozens others hospitalized. The idea that a solution to this pandemic is imminent provides an incredible amount of false hope to individuals. The scientific reality is markedly different from the one pushed by the press. In fact, It is unlikely a vaccine will be developed within the calendar year. Instead of focusing on the science and turning the platform to scientists actively engaged with the scientific method, a band-aid appears to be plastered on the problem. “No news is good news” is an axiom no longer. 

Meanwhile the academic press has seen a surge in articles. Nearly 15 thousand articles were published in bioRxiv over the last two months on papers surrounding COVID-19. Only a handful of these articles will be accepted by journals. Shoddy methods, improper sampling, hasty conclusions and writing filled with inaccuracies and typos clutter the preprint server. The local press, hearing word that groundbreaking COVID-19 research is being conducted in their own backyards, jump to the scene. Labs with poor ethical practice, coupled with untrained reporters is a recipe for disaster. While most conclusions remain inconclusive (and thereby unexciting news), others fall into the grey-area of dangerous science and conspiracy theory. The average reader is more compelled by the latter — leading to dangerous sentiments ranging from anxiety to xenophobia. 

Perhaps this is why science journalism matters now more than ever. Great science journalists like Carl Zimmer and Ed Yong are seasoned experts, working for years on their craft. But instead the pandemic has birthed many charlatans. By simply echoing the stories of their peers they distill what could be a powerful moment into something entirely derivative. And with a 24 hour news cycle, until the “next big thing” a story is covered repeatedly — sometimes to the point of boredom. Scientists must be leading the charge, controlling the coverage and guiding the conversation — not journalists. 

It has become overwhelmingly difficult to listen to news. The average newscaster has become somewhat of an actor. The story is no longer allowed to speak for itself. Instead, stories of families separated, livelihoods decimated, tears, anger, frustration — emotive stories — receive press. While we certainly need to understand the human toll the virus has taken on the country, that should not be the focus. Instead, the lines must be kept open to hear the facts, and process them in a way that is clear and informative. Science, not emotion, should be at the forefront. 

Reforming the American press is impossible. And many may believe it is entirely un-American to suggest that the coverage of COVID-19 has been inadequate. Only time can judge the way this pandemic was covered. As the years progress, we will realize how much clutter filled our 2020 newsfeeds. Not only were people overwhelmed with information, they were also told what to feel about it. Science is not unfeeling — but it certainly does not rely on the human psyche to stay relevant. As we move into the next phase of our time with the virus, we must recognize the role that science must play. The last thing we need is a plague on words. 
